The number of possible, unique chess games is far greater than the number of electrons in the universe! The number of electrons is estimated to be a mere 1079, while the number of unique chess games is 10120. In English, that's a thousand trillion, trillion, trillion, trillion, trillion, trillion, trillion, trillion, trillion games.
Chess is called the game of kings, because for many centuries it was played primarily by nobility and the upper classes.
The word "checkmate" comes from the Persian phrase "shah mat," which means "the king is defeated."
The folding chess board was originally invented in 1125 by a chess-playing priest. Since the Church forbid priests to play chess, he hid his chess board by making one that looked simply like two books lying together.
The Isle of Lewis chess pieces are the oldest surviving complete chess set known. Discovered on they Isle of Lewis, they are made from walrus tusks and show their characters in a range of bad moods - from anger to depression.
The names of the pieces-- the queen, king, knight, rook and bishop came about during the Middle Ages, when society was extremely oriented towards war and rigidly stratified. During the Renaissance period, society became more dynamic and rules were added to enable rapid attack techniques. These include making the queen more powerful, and permitting pawns to move two squares on the first move.
The rook is named from an Arabic word rukh, meaning chariot. This reflects its ability to move quickly in straight lines, but not leap over obstacles. During the Middle Ages, when chariots were no longer in use, the rook was gradually modified to look more like the turret of a castle.
The knight's role has been stable over time. Even in the earliest versions of the game, it represented the cavalry and had the unique ability to leap over its opponents.
The word "checkmate" comes from the Persian phrase "shah mat," which means "the king is defeated."
Lewis Carrol¡¯s novel ¡°Through the Looking Glass¡± was based on a chess game, much the way ¡°Alice in Wonderland¡± was based on playing cards. The idea for picturing the countryside as a chess board came from Lewis Carrol¡¯s days in Oxmoor, where his apartment overlooked a cultivated moor, separated into neat, rectangular farmer¡¯s fields
The number of possible ways of playing the first four moves for both sides in a game of chess is 318,979,564,000 .
The longest game of chess that is theoretically possible is 5,949 moves.
According to the America's Foundation for Chess, there are 169,518,829,100,544,000,000,000,000,000 (approximately 1.70x1029) ways to play the first 10 moves of a game of chess. And they thought a computer would solve chess! 
The first chessboard with alternating light and dark squares (as it appears today) was made in Europe in 1090.
The longest chess game ever was I.Nikolic - Arsovic, Belgrade 1989, which ended in 269 moves. The game was a draw.
There are 400 different possible positions after one move each. There are 72,084 different possible positions after two moves each. There are over 9 million different possible positions after three moves each. There are over 318 billion different possible positions after four moves each. The number of distinct 40-move games in chess is far greater than the number of electrons in the observable universe. The number of electrons is approximately 1079, while the number of unique chess games is 10120.
he new pawn move, where pawns were allowed to advance two squares on its first move instead of one, was first introduced in Spain in 1280.
Kirk and Spock have played chess three times on the show Star Trek. Kirk won all three games.
A computer called Deep Thought became the first computer to beat an international grandmaster in November 1988, Long Beach, California.
Garry Kasparov, at 22, became the youngest ever world champion. Ruslan Ponomariov was younger but he was not the undisputed world champion; Maia Chiburdanidze was even younger when she won the women's title.


